PPS definitions WIP (#134)
NHSDigital/prevention-services-design-history: app/posts/personalised-prevention-services/2025/06/2025-06-03-definitions.md

---
title: "Personalised prevention: working definitions"
description: "Working definitions of terms we use when we’re talking about personalised prevention"
date: 2025-06-03
---

These working definitions aim to give people working on personalised prevention services a shared understanding of the language they’re using internally.

## Prevention

Any work or activity we do to stop someone getting ill with a named clinical condition.

> ## Clinical versus lifestyle

Reviewer: Is it worth saying something about this being an over simplification to split by "Clinical" and "Lifestyle" – for example some weight management services are supported by clinicians like a dietitian-led service for weight management, or could a clinician work on a service that supports behaviour change (like gardening), sorry if I'm splitting hairs.

Maybe its the title "Clinical treatment" and "Lifestyle and behaviour change serivces"

### Clinical

The examination and treatment of patients and ill people by a medical professional.

Clinical services are specifically provided by medical professionals.

> A clinical service the Personalised Prevention Platform recommends might be a self-referral to Talking Therapies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A clinical service the Personalised Prevention Platform recommends might be a self‑referral to Talking Therapies.
```

### Lifestyle

The way someone lives.

> A lifestyle service the Personalised Prevention Platform recommends might be a non-medical service we think could help stop you getting ill, for example WeightWatchers or a yoga class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A lifestyle service recommended to a user might be a non‑medical service we think could help stop you getting ill, for example WeightWatchers or a yoga class.
```

> A lifestyle service the Personalised Prevention Platform recommends might be a non-medical service we think could help stop you getting ill, for example WeightWatchers or a yoga class.

Reviewer: "non-medical" feels like we're introducing another definition here

Lifestyle and behaviour change services are not required to be delivered by medical professionals.

## Assisted and unassisted services

### Assisted services

> Any service where there’s real-time human help, for example a taught Zumba class or a stop-smoking app with a coach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any service where there’s real-time human help, for example a taught Zumba class or a stop‑smoking app with a coach.
```

### Unassisted services

Any service that can be used in a self-service way, for example by:
* reading a stop-smoking book
* using a gym alone (not doing a class or getting personal training)
* using an app with an AI coach

## Behaviour change support

### NHS only

> Services presenting as “from the NHS”, for example Couch to 5k or Better Health services. These services might be funded centrally by organisations like NHSE or DHSC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Services presenting as “from the NHS”, for example Couch to 5k or Better Health services. These services might be funded centrally by organisations like NHSE or DHSC.  
```

### NHS-supported services

Services with any funding from DHSC, NHSE or an organisation like a charity.

A service that’s delivered in partnership with a charity like Mind or anything with an NHS logo on it, for example the Richmond Wellbeing Service.

### Wider healthcare prevention services

Anything else not funded by NHS bodies, such as services provided by:
* councils, for example leisure centres, gyms or wellness hubs
* the third sector, for example by a community group or voluntary organisation

> * private organisations, for example, Better Health recommends WeightWatchers and Joe Wicks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* private organisations, for example, Better Health recommends WeightWatchers and Joe Wicks
```
